README.md, before:


# Portfolio Analytics System

This system provides a comprehensive suite of services for portfolio analytics, including position tracking, valuation, performance calculation, and risk analysis. It is designed as a distributed, event-driven architecture using Kafka for messaging and PostgreSQL for data persistence.

## Table of Contents

- [Architectural Overview](#architectural-overview)
- [System Setup](#system-setup)
- [Running the System](#running-the-system)
- [Running Tests](#running-tests)
- [Verifying the Workflow](#verifying-the-workflow)
- [Code Quality](#code-quality)
- [Tools](#tools)

## Architectural Overview

The system follows a microservices architecture, where each service is responsible for a specific domain. Data flows through the system via Kafka topics, ensuring loose coupling and scalability.

### Core Data Flow

1.  **Ingestion Service**: Receives raw transaction and market data via a REST API and publishes it to Kafka.
2.  **Persistence Service**: Consumes raw data from Kafka and persists it to the PostgreSQL database.
3.  **Calculator Services**:
    * **Position Calculator**: Consumes persisted transactions, calculates position history, and manages reprocessing logic.
    * **Position Valuation Calculator**: Consumes price data and valuation jobs to calculate the market value of positions. It includes two key background tasks:
        * **ValuationScheduler**: Creates backfill valuation jobs, advances watermarks, and creates durable jobs for large-scale price reprocessing events.
        * **ReprocessingWorker**: Consumes the durable reprocessing jobs to fan-out watermark resets in a controlled, scalable manner, mitigating the "Thundering Herd" problem.
    * **Cashflow Calculator**: Calculates cash flows based on transactions.
4.  **Timeseries Generator Service**: Aggregates daily position data into position-level and portfolio-level time series.
5.  **Query Service**: Provides a rich FastAPI interface for all read operations. This includes both fetching foundational data (portfolios, transactions, etc.) and performing complex, on-the-fly analytical calculations such as:
    * **Performance Analytics** (TWR, MWR)
    * **Risk Analytics** (Volatility, Sharpe, VaR, etc.)
    * **Concentration Analytics** (HHI, Issuer Exposure)
    * **Consolidated Reporting** (Portfolio Review)

### Key Architectural Patterns

* **Event-Driven**: Services communicate asynchronously through events, promoting resilience and scalability.
* **Outbox Pattern**: Ensures atomicity between database writes and event publishing, guaranteeing "at-least-once" delivery.
* **Idempotent Consumers**: Consumers are designed to handle duplicate messages gracefully, preventing data corruption.
* **Durable Job Queues**: For high-volume, asynchronous tasks like reprocessing fan-outs, the system uses persistent database tables as durable queues to ensure reliability and control.

## System Setup

Follow these steps to set up the development environment.

### Prerequisites

* Docker and Docker Compose
* Python 3.11+
* Git Bash (on Windows)
* VSCode (recommended)

### Installation

1.  **Clone the Repository**:
    ```bash
    git clone <your-repository-url>
    cd portfolio-analytics-system
    ```

2.  **Create a Virtual Environment**:
    ```bash
    py -3.12 -m venv .venv
    ```

3.  **Activate the Virtual Environment**:
    ```bash
    source .venv/Scripts/activate
    ```

4.  **Install Dependencies**:
    ```bash
    python -m pip install --upgrade pip
    make install
    ```

5.  **Set Up Environment Variables**:
    ```bash
    cp .env.example .env
    ```
    Review the `.env` file and ensure the settings are correct for your environment.

## Running the System

1.  **Start Infrastructure**:
    This command starts Kafka, Zookeeper, PostgreSQL, and Prometheus.
    ```bash
    docker compose up -d
    ```

2.  **Set Up Kafka Topics**:
    This tool idempotently creates all necessary Kafka topics.
    ```bash
    python -m tools.kafka_setup
    ```

3.  **Run Database Migrations**:
    Apply all pending database migrations to set up the schema.
    ```bash
    alembic upgrade head
    ```

4.  **Start Services**:
    Open a new terminal for each service to run them concurrently.
    ```bash
    # Terminal 1: Persistence Service
    python -m src.services.persistence_service.app.main

    # Terminal 2: Position Calculator Service
    python -m src.services.calculators.position_calculator.app.main

    # Terminal 3: Position Valuation Calculator Service (includes scheduler and worker)
    python -m src.services.calculators.position_valuation_calculator.app.main

    # Terminal 4: Timeseries Generator Service
    python -m src.services.timeseries_generator_service.app.main

    # Terminal 5: Query Service (API)
    python -m src.services.query_service.app.main

    # Terminal 6: Ingestion Service (API)
    python -m src.services.ingestion_service.app.main
    ```

## Running Tests

To run the enforced unit test gate:

```bash
make test
```

To run the integration-lite suite used in CI coverage:

```bash
make test-integration-lite
```

To run the query-service unit suite directly:

```bash
pytest tests/unit/services/query_service -q
```

To run the full local quality gate (lint + mypy + combined coverage gate):

```bash
make ci-local
```

## Verifying the Workflow

1.  **Ingest Data**:
    Use the `ingest_data.py` tool to load sample data into the system.

    ```bash
    python -m tools.ingest_data --all
    ```

    For UI/file-upload style onboarding, PAS also supports:

    ```bash
    curl -X POST "http://localhost:8200/ingest/portfolio-bundle" \
      -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
      -d '{"mode":"UPSERT","businessDates":[],"portfolios":[],"instruments":[],"transactions":[],"marketPrices":[],"fxRates":[]}'
    ```

    For PA/DPM style integration contracts, PAS query-service supports:

    ```bash
    curl -X POST "http://localhost:8201/integration/portfolios/PORT001/core-snapshot" \
      -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
      -d '{"asOfDate":"2026-02-23","includeSections":["OVERVIEW","ALLOCATION","HOLDINGS","TRANSACTIONS"],"consumerSystem":"PA"}'
    ```

2.  **Query the API**:
    Once the services have processed the data, you can query the `query-service` API endpoints.

      * API Docs: `http://localhost:8201/docs`

3.  **Use Support and Lineage APIs (Preferred over direct DB access)**:
    Use the query-service operational APIs for support diagnostics.

    ```bash
    # Portfolio-level support overview
    curl "http://localhost:8201/support/portfolios/PORT001/overview"

    # Key-level lineage (epoch/watermark + latest artifacts)
    curl "http://localhost:8201/lineage/portfolios/PORT001/securities/SEC001"

    # Portfolio lineage key listing for support dashboards
    curl "http://localhost:8201/lineage/portfolios/PORT001/keys?reprocessing_status=CURRENT&skip=0&limit=100"

    # Valuation and aggregation support job queues
    curl "http://localhost:8201/support/portfolios/PORT001/valuation-jobs?status=PENDING&skip=0&limit=100"
    curl "http://localhost:8201/support/portfolios/PORT001/aggregation-jobs?status=PROCESSING&skip=0&limit=100"
    ```

## Code Quality

This project uses a DPM-aligned engineering baseline:

```bash
make lint
make typecheck
make check
make coverage-gate
make ci-local
```

CI workflow shape:

- `Workflow Lint`
- `Lint, Typecheck, Unit Tests`
- `Tests (unit)` + `Tests (integration-lite)` coverage data jobs
- `Coverage Gate (Combined)` with `--fail-under=84`
- `Validate Docker Build`

## Tools

The `tools/` directory contains helpful scripts for development:

  * `kafka_setup.py`: Creates Kafka topics.
  * `ingest_data.py`: Ingests sample data.
  * `dlq_replayer.py`: Replays messages from a Dead Letter Queue.
  * `reprocess_tool.py`: Triggers reprocessing for specific transactions.

<!-- end list -->

Commit message:

Harden CI e2e workflow and align local e2e defaults with compose ports

README.md, after:


# Portfolio Analytics System

This system provides a comprehensive suite of services for portfolio analytics, including position tracking, valuation, performance calculation, and risk analysis. It is designed as a distributed, event-driven architecture using Kafka for messaging and PostgreSQL for data persistence.

## Table of Contents

- [Architectural Overview](#architectural-overview)
- [System Setup](#system-setup)
- [Running the System](#running-the-system)
- [Running Tests](#running-tests)
- [Verifying the Workflow](#verifying-the-workflow)
- [Code Quality](#code-quality)
- [Tools](#tools)

## Architectural Overview

The system follows a microservices architecture, where each service is responsible for a specific domain. Data flows through the system via Kafka topics, ensuring loose coupling and scalability.

### Core Data Flow

1.  **Ingestion Service**: Receives raw transaction and market data via a REST API and publishes it to Kafka.
2.  **Persistence Service**: Consumes raw data from Kafka and persists it to the PostgreSQL database.
3.  **Calculator Services**:
    * **Position Calculator**: Consumes persisted transactions, calculates position history, and manages reprocessing logic.
    * **Position Valuation Calculator**: Consumes price data and valuation jobs to calculate the market value of positions. It includes two key background tasks:
        * **ValuationScheduler**: Creates backfill valuation jobs, advances watermarks, and creates durable jobs for large-scale price reprocessing events.
        * **ReprocessingWorker**: Consumes the durable reprocessing jobs to fan-out watermark resets in a controlled, scalable manner, mitigating the "Thundering Herd" problem.
    * **Cashflow Calculator**: Calculates cash flows based on transactions.
4.  **Timeseries Generator Service**: Aggregates daily position data into position-level and portfolio-level time series.
5.  **Query Service**: Provides a rich FastAPI interface for all read operations. This includes both fetching foundational data (portfolios, transactions, etc.) and performing complex, on-the-fly analytical calculations such as:
    * **Performance Analytics** (TWR, MWR)
    * **Risk Analytics** (Volatility, Sharpe, VaR, etc.)
    * **Concentration Analytics** (HHI, Issuer Exposure)
    * **Consolidated Reporting** (Portfolio Review)

### Key Architectural Patterns

* **Event-Driven**: Services communicate asynchronously through events, promoting resilience and scalability.
* **Outbox Pattern**: Ensures atomicity between database writes and event publishing, guaranteeing "at-least-once" delivery.
* **Idempotent Consumers**: Consumers are designed to handle duplicate messages gracefully, preventing data corruption.
* **Durable Job Queues**: For high-volume, asynchronous tasks like reprocessing fan-outs, the system uses persistent database tables as durable queues to ensure reliability and control.

## System Setup

Follow these steps to set up the development environment.

### Prerequisites

* Docker and Docker Compose
* Python 3.11+
* Git Bash (on Windows)
* VSCode (recommended)

### Installation

1.  **Clone the Repository**:
    ```bash
    git clone <your-repository-url>
    cd portfolio-analytics-system
    ```

2.  **Create a Virtual Environment**:
    ```bash
    py -3.12 -m venv .venv
    ```

3.  **Activate the Virtual Environment**:
    ```bash
    source .venv/Scripts/activate
    ```

4.  **Install Dependencies**:
    ```bash
    python -m pip install --upgrade pip
    make install
    ```

5.  **Set Up Environment Variables**:
    ```bash
    cp .env.example .env
    ```
    Review the `.env` file and ensure the settings are correct for your environment.

## Running the System

1.  **Start Infrastructure**:
    This command starts Kafka, Zookeeper, PostgreSQL, and Prometheus.
    ```bash
    docker compose up -d
    ```

2.  **Set Up Kafka Topics**:
    This tool idempotently creates all necessary Kafka topics.
    ```bash
    python -m tools.kafka_setup
    ```

3.  **Run Database Migrations**:
    Apply all pending database migrations to set up the schema.
    ```bash
    alembic upgrade head
    ```

4.  **Start Services**:
    Open a new terminal for each service to run them concurrently.
    ```bash
    # Terminal 1: Persistence Service
    python -m src.services.persistence_service.app.main

    # Terminal 2: Position Calculator Service
    python -m src.services.calculators.position_calculator.app.main

    # Terminal 3: Position Valuation Calculator Service (includes scheduler and worker)
    python -m src.services.calculators.position_valuation_calculator.app.main

    # Terminal 4: Timeseries Generator Service
    python -m src.services.timeseries_generator_service.app.main

    # Terminal 5: Query Service (API)
    python -m src.services.query_service.app.main

    # Terminal 6: Ingestion Service (API)
    python -m src.services.ingestion_service.app.main
    ```

## Running Tests

To run the enforced unit test gate:

```bash
make test
```

To run the integration-lite suite used in CI coverage:

```bash
make test-integration-lite
```

To run the query-service unit suite directly:

```bash
pytest tests/unit/services/query_service -q
```

To run the full local quality gate (lint + mypy + combined coverage gate):

```bash
make ci-local
```

To run the E2E smoke suite locally (requires Docker engine running):

```bash
make test-e2e-smoke
```

## Verifying the Workflow

1.  **Ingest Data**:
    Use the `ingest_data.py` tool to load sample data into the system.

    ```bash
    python -m tools.ingest_data --all
    ```

    For UI/file-upload style onboarding, PAS also supports:

    ```bash
    curl -X POST "http://localhost:8200/ingest/portfolio-bundle" \
      -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
      -d '{"mode":"UPSERT","businessDates":[],"portfolios":[],"instruments":[],"transactions":[],"marketPrices":[],"fxRates":[]}'
    ```

    For PA/DPM style integration contracts, PAS query-service supports:

    ```bash
    curl -X POST "http://localhost:8201/integration/portfolios/PORT001/core-snapshot" \
      -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
      -d '{"asOfDate":"2026-02-23","includeSections":["OVERVIEW","ALLOCATION","HOLDINGS","TRANSACTIONS"],"consumerSystem":"PA"}'
    ```

2.  **Query the API**:
    Once the services have processed the data, you can query the `query-service` API endpoints.

      * API Docs: `http://localhost:8201/docs`

3.  **Use Support and Lineage APIs (Preferred over direct DB access)**:
    Use the query-service operational APIs for support diagnostics.

    ```bash
    # Portfolio-level support overview
    curl "http://localhost:8201/support/portfolios/PORT001/overview"

    # Key-level lineage (epoch/watermark + latest artifacts)
    curl "http://localhost:8201/lineage/portfolios/PORT001/securities/SEC001"

    # Portfolio lineage key listing for support dashboards
    curl "http://localhost:8201/lineage/portfolios/PORT001/keys?reprocessing_status=CURRENT&skip=0&limit=100"

    # Valuation and aggregation support job queues
    curl "http://localhost:8201/support/portfolios/PORT001/valuation-jobs?status=PENDING&skip=0&limit=100"
    curl "http://localhost:8201/support/portfolios/PORT001/aggregation-jobs?status=PROCESSING&skip=0&limit=100"
    ```

## Code Quality

This project uses a DPM-aligned engineering baseline:

```bash
make lint
make typecheck
make check
make coverage-gate
make ci-local
```

CI workflow shape:

- `Workflow Lint`
- `Lint, Typecheck, Unit Tests`
- `Tests (unit)` + `Tests (integration-lite)` coverage data jobs
- `Coverage Gate (Combined)` with `--fail-under=84`
- `Validate Docker Build`
- `E2E Smoke (Manual)` on `workflow_dispatch`

## Tools

The `tools/` directory contains helpful scripts for development:

  * `kafka_setup.py`: Creates Kafka topics.
  * `ingest_data.py`: Ingests sample data.
  * `dlq_replayer.py`: Replays messages from a Dead Letter Queue.
  * `reprocess_tool.py`: Triggers reprocessing for specific transactions.

<!-- end list -->
